Friends,, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you.
Friends, we're coming to the end of our Lenten journey. We come to Palm Sunday. Thank you.
I also call it Passion Sunday because on Palm Sunday we always read at Mass the passion narrative from one of the synoptic gospels, Matthew, Mark, or Luke. We read John's account.
On to count on Good Friday. Good Friday.
Um,
The Gospels have been called,
Passion narratives with long introductions, meaning what they're really about.
What sums up their meaning is this great narrative of the passion. So,
We pay very special attention on Palm Sunday.
something i like to do.
is to find the elements that are unique to this particular version. So this year,
We hear from St. Luke.
And there's a lot of overlap, obviously, in the Matthew, Mark, and Luke's account of the Passion, but there's certain things stand out in each of the Gospel writers. So I want to look at two things.
things. They're
peculiar to Luke
And they both have to do.
With forgiveness.
They both have to do with the forgiveness of sins.
Here's the first one.
Only at St. Luke do we find this dialogue between Jesus and the two criminals who are crucified on either side of him.
Only loot do we have
This man, the tradition is called Dismas. We don't know his name from the gospel, but traditionally he's called Dismas.
The good thief.
This dialogue is of extreme importance, seems to me, for all of us sinners.
So, you know the scene well.
Jesus crucified in the middle on either side these two. They're called criminal bandits, I think, in other gospels.
who who they were what their crimes were is a little bit unclear but they were
they're bad people.
And they're being ah, punished.
The first one
speaks to Jesus in a very aggressive way.
Are you not the Christ?
Save yourself and us
Look, we're all sinners, right?
I'm a sinner. Everyone looks at me as a sinner. So we know what this space is like.
When you've sung to a low place, spiritually speaking,
You know you're You're down in the in the pit.
One option that is
Often chosen.
Is one of recrimination,
Of bitterness,
Of anger,
A tendency to lash out, to blame somebody else for your troubles.
All of that is summed up here.
So here's the Lord Jesus Christ.
Right next to him.
Well, look, I thought you were the big shot. You're the Messiah. So why don't you save us? Save yourself. Yeah.
Disrespectful.
Full of recrimination, full of anger and bitterness.
Every one of us
Has been there.
right?
Every one of us in our sin
have found ourselves at different points in our lives like this man.
Well then
We're meant to look at the other.
Criminal, the other.
The other man being punished.
He says,
Have you no fear of God?
Indeed, we've been condemned justly.
For our sentence corresponds to our crimes, but this man,
Has done nothing.
criminal.
The contrast is extremely illuminating, isn't it?
The first one sunk in bitterness.
Lashing out of those around him.
So taking no responsibility, just trying to find an easy way out.
Then the good thief.
Dismas.
His first move is to admit
His sin.
Look, we're being punished, but it fits our crimes.
In other words,
I'm guilty.
I'm not making excuses.
Not blaming somebody else.
Not lashing out in anger.
I'm admitting,
I'm a sinner
How important is this, again, fellow sinners? We opt for that first option way too often.
This is the path of salvation.
Admitting
That we're sinners.
How difficult this is, may I say.
In our present culture.
I think one of the marks of our time.
Is a passion for self-exculpation.
Do you know what I mean?
We need...
Forgive ourselves. Look, I'm not to blame. This is not my fault.
It's the society, it's my inheritance, it's my addiction, it's whatever.
The last thing I want to do is admit that I am a sinner.
I've done wrong. A punishment that I'm receiving. Look, I deserve it.
Interesting, everybody, that one of the prerequisites
When you come into confession to receive absolution, a prerequisite is:
The showing of contrition.
That's why when you go to confession, it's not just a little one.
an empty ritual when the priest will ask you to say
Either in that very formal language or your own language,
Some act of contrition.
"Contrition" in the Latin word is "contricia" behind that, which means "to be crushed."
It means a crushing.
That we have to acknowledge
That sin has crushed us, that we're under the weight of it, we're guilty of it.
if we can't admit that, then the forgiveness can't flow into our hearts. see, not because God's being difficult.
But we're being so resistant to it. If you can't admit your sin, you can't receive forgiveness. It's as simple as that. It's again a type of spiritual physics.
And so
That this man,
look.
He's dying.
he's a bad man I don't know exactly what he did but he's a bad man and he knows it
And now he's dying.
It's the end of his life.
But he's greedy.
Act,
And it's what opens him to salvation.
Is he admits his sin?
And so, as we come to the end of Lent,
Fellow sinners
Own up to it.
You're a sinner. I'm a sinner.
Don't blame others. Don't reach out in anger.
Admit your sin.
In the presence of the Lord.
And then
It's so beautiful.
The whole tradition is reverenced this in poetry and song.
He turns to the Lord and says,
Jesus, remember me.
When you come into your kingdom,
The first thing that strikes a lot of the spiritual masters is the use of the Lord's
First name. It's relatively rare in the Gospels.
that he's called
Jesus. I mean, he's called Master, he's called Son of David, Lord.
But you'd call him by his first name.
Well, it's not presumptuous. It's an expression of intimacy, right?
Of friendship.
Jesus
Remember me when you come into your kingdom.
He's not claiming virtue here.
I'm not claiming merit. Like, hey, Lord, let me into your kingdom because I've done the following good things. No, that's
None of that.
He's a sinner. He knows it.
He's admitted it.
And then...
Jesus, remember me.
When you come into your kingdom,
That's a really good spiritual attitude.
May I suggest as we enter Holy Week?
That's a really good prayer.
For all of us sinners to pray, Jesus,
I'm not claiming you
I'm just saying, Meredith, I'm just saying
Remember me.
When you come in your kingdom
And then,
I mean, some of the most beautiful words of the New Testament.
The Lord says, "Amen."
I say to you today
You'll be with me in paradise.
Um,
Dante said that
All God needs.
To forgive the sinner is one
Tear of repentance.
Think of the worst person.
The worst person lived his whole life in sin.
comes to the very end.
But
But on his deathbed,
It gives rise to one tier of repentance. It's all God needs.
That's all he needs.
Jesus, remember me.
And then the Lord says, "Amen."
Today you'll be with me in paradise.
Beautiful prayer.
Fellow sinners never give up.
Never, never give up.
I know we're tempted. I'm the worst sinner. I'm sunk too low. He'll never forgive me. All I can do is lash out in anger. No, no.
That's the one...
Thief
Go with this man.
Okay, here's the second thing.
One of the things that's unique to Luke, and it's also related to forgiveness, it's only in Luke that
that we find Jesus from the cross saying,
Father, forgive them.
They know not what they do.
One of the most moving lines of Jesus, only in Luke that we find that
You know, I've said to you many times before, the death of Jesus is the result of a conglomeration of.
Human dysfunction.
When we read this passion narrative on Ponce Longo, listen.
Hatred and cruelty, stupidity, violence, escape-goating.
Injustice
All of it.
It's it's
Like all the rats came out of their hiding place. All of the wickedness is revealed.
All the masks are torn away and we see.
All of human dysfunction coming out to meet him.
What's his response?
Father, forgive them.
They know not what they do.
And see, what don't they know? And this, of course, is giving it away.
If Jesus is simply this great,
moral figure. He's an inspiring spiritual teacher.
um, okay, he says, I forgive them.
But who is he?
It's not just that.
He's the word made flesh.
He's the splendor of the Father.
He's the incarnation of the Logos.
He's God from God, light from light, true God from true God.
Therefore,
When human sin comes out against him,
It's coming out against God.
You see now on the cross, it's not just a good man dying.
The central tragedy of human life
It's the central drama of all of humanity.
It's human sin
Meeting God.
Now think of this everybody
So what every sin from the smallest peccadillo to mass murder has in common is
Is this move?
It's human wickedness meeting
God coming out against God.
What we're meant to see here in this is everything. That's why I say it's all of my sins, right?
Yes, in principle, are present there. Every sin you've ever committed, every sin of the human race has this in common. It's human resistance to God.
To God.
Now, Jesus' words are not just those of a good, pious man.
Father, forgive them.
They, they don't know.
Who I am.
they don't know that I'm God from God
Therefore,
This word from Jesus
Is our salvation
We come at God with everything we've got. We come at Him with all of our resistance. And what do we meet?
Forgiveness.
That's Christianity, everybody. That's the uniqueness of our Christian faith.
We don't meet resistance from God. We don't meet anger from God. We don't meet retribution from God. We don't meet avenging justice from God. We meet
Forgiveness,
Now, take this scene and transpose it into the
The resurrection appearance.
When Jesus appears to those,
Whom?
Had abandoned him, had betrayed him, had denied him, his friends, his disciples, who had abandoned him at the moment of truth.
and he shows them his wounds yes I mean you've you've
This is the sign of your sin.
But then he says to them,
Shalom.
Peace.
The good thief
Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom. I assure you this day you're with me in paradise.
All of human sin
It comes out to meet him, resisting anger.
God.
And God answers,
In forgiving love.
Do you see why?
We say the cross is the moment of our salvation.
Why we say on that cross, the sins of the world are forgiven.
Do you see why we say the Father is pleased with the sacrifice of the Son?
That's why, because in that moment,
Human sin was
dealt with.
So, everybody, on this Passion Sunday, this Palm Sunday,
As we read Luke's account.
Pay attention to this special stress placed upon
God's forgiving love.
Move into the space of Dismas the Good Thief.
Contrite, Lord, I'm not running away or denying it. I'm a sinner.
But Jesus remembered me.
When you come into your kingdom,
Your sin
If you're open to forgiveness, we'll be met with divine mercy.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire dot Org.